Tables are one of the most used type of testing artifact. To set up tables for your testing
effort, you might find that it is best to take some time at the start of your project to create
table templates. To create table templates, you can review your test plans and derive
from them the types of tables you will need. Experienced testers often develop an extensive
set of table types that address specific testing needs. In her book Introducing Software
Testing, Louise Tamres provides an extensive review of tables she has developed. (The
complete reference appears at the end of this chapter.) Among the tables that Tamres discusses
are the following:
Decision. A decision table allows you to organize information along the lines typical
of logical tables. Such tables are useful when you have multiple conditions that
correspond to multiple actions.
Keystroke/mouse action. This table tracks keystrokes or mouse actions against
fields and buttons. Among other tasks, this table provides a convenient way to
track the minute test cases that are involved in testing user interfaces.
Test procedure summary. This table enables you to coordinate test procedures
when you have a set of test procedures that consist of many test cases or when you
have test cases that involve procedures or a set of subordinate test cases.
Boundary condition tables. This table provides a way to ensure that you cover the
relatively few values you apply to a test scenario involving boundary conditions.
Cross reference. This can be a general utility table for tracking test procedures and
test cases. For example, suppose that you face a set of dependent operations. You
might use one dialog box in the GUI to enter values and then, later, access another
dialog box to retrieve the values. You might find it necessary to cross reference the
results of the two sets of interactions.Test management. Test management involves tracking the performance of tests
and the results. You might want to create a table that summarizes the results of
dozens of test procedures.