Working Metaphors
The spiral has long been used as a way to illustrate one version of how software engineering
happens. At the same time, it can be used to illustrate a path to professional growth if
you are a software engineer involved in game development. The spiral serves so well to
illustrate processes of growth because it provides a rich visual metaphor for how people
often negotiate the stress that change presents. Divided into quadrants, the spiral illustrates
two things. The spiral itself illustrates iteration—repeated, gradually more encompassing
revisions of a product. The quadrants illustrate incremental development, which
involves planning iterations after evaluating the risks that each iterative effort poses.
When you view the development process as iterative and incremental, you place yourself
in a position to select goals that you are most likely to achieve.When you plan iterations
as incremental parts of a whole, you are in a much better position than otherwise to anticipate
complexity and take measures to ensure that it does not become overwhelming.
As odd as it might sound, developing your own career in an incremental and iterative
fashion makes a great deal of sense. In an industry in which products are often produced
one after another and schedules tend to be characterized by long hours that often make it
nearly impossible to learn new things, it is important to structure change so that it is continuous
and yet not so demanding as to be counterproductive. To improve your knowledge
of new technology, for instance, you might have to attend a conference or acquire
and explore a new class library. If your company pays the costs, all the better. But it might
be that you will have to attend to these costs on your own.
Incremental development implies that you put some things aside. Time allows only so
much effort. You must select what is most important. Iteration implies that you do something
over and over again. Leaning is just this type of activity. You do it over and over
again, but you change and expand the areas you seek to know. Some areas are transient.
Others endure for decades. Whether an area of interest persists, grows, or diminishes
depends on what you view as important.
To perform an activity incrementally implies that rather than doing something from start
to finish in a grand way, you start out in a careful way, take time to determine what you
can and cannot do, plan your activity, and then execute your plan. What you determine
you want to learn can be drawn from your work experiences in light of what you know
about the core areas of knowledge that define your field. What you put aside can be
regarded as material that is tentatively scheduled for future learning. Figure 19.14 illustrates
the basic cycle of decisions.