Individual Practices
Configuration management issues relating to workspaces deserve attention. Generally, an
individual developer who is part of a team works on one area of code while other team
members work on other areas of code. Reviewing the assumptions and rules that define
this activity can help promote practices that enable individuals and teams to work more
effectively. The following list names a few issues that arise in this respect:
Focus development on the primary line of code. Development activity that does
not focus on the primary line of code creates a liability. Stories about schisms
destroying projects illustrate the importance of focusing on the primary line of
code. Problems usually arise when headstrong developers begin using different
approaches to solving problems and develop redundant sets of functionality.
Another situation arises when someone is brought in for a few days as a contractor.
The contractor comes and goes, and the result is a component that functions
perfectly when compiled on the contractor’s computer but, lacking integration, is
so problem plagued that no one can make it work during the next integration.
Use integration and baselines. The Ankh development team decided to use integrations
and baselines implicitly to enforce configuration policies. The approach
used stripes as occasions for bringing all the development activity into a comprehensive
integration that had to be synchronized across the board. Using the project
management schedule as a strategic guide and the configuration management plan
as a kind of archeological map, you can re-create the development history of the
game. Although the Ankh team effort possessed many distinctive (or eccentric)
characteristics, the advisability of such incremental, iterative approaches to development
is acknowledged almost universally.
Merge on a frequent and shallow basis. The more changes you make between
builds, the longer it’s going to take to resolve difficulties. Obviously, keeping files
out for days on end is probably going to create problems. The policies you set are
up to your team. One rule is that a work session should involve one task. Of
course, tasks can be longer or shorter, but if you analyze your work, you can probably
break down longer tasks into shorter ones if the tasks you initially encounter
extend over several days or weeks.