Release
A release is a separately installed, complete product. It is what is shipped to the customer.
With each new release, you should reset the release number so that it’s the only field that
has a value greater than zero. In other words, you should set version, update, and test fields
within the release number (if you use the type of numbering that this chapter discusses)
to zero. The first release of a product according to the template given in Figure 17.8 would
be 01.00.00.000.
A release should represent a completely new build and integration of the product.
Achieving this goal involves removing all old files from the build environment and replacing
them with the files that you have slated for inclusion in the new release. Even if you
have no prior releases, you must confirm that you are not including files that you have not
scheduled formally for inclusion in the release build. In the team’s work with Ankh, examples
of problems resulting from neglect of such activities included failed builds due to
outdated Boost files and deterioration of performance due to sloppiness in the use of the
debug version of DirectX. A clean build area would have eliminated these problems.
Version
Probably one of the best uses of the version number is to designate when you create a
baseline of the product during the development phase. Configuration managers sometimes
call a baseline a snapshot of the product during its development history. Effectively
capturing a snapshot requires ensuring that it includes all files that compose the product.
To facilitate the documentation of this activity, the Ankh Software Design Specification
provides a section that documents the components of the game using UML package and
component diagrams. Likewise, the Ankh Software Configuration Management Plan provides
similar diagrams, along with a directory specification and a build schedule, to trace
versions during the development process.
Version numbers in the numbering system presented here follow the first dot (or period).
Figure 17.9 illustrates how you can trace the builds representing the stripes in the design
of Ankh using version numbers. Each successive version shows that you have added the
functionality of a given stripe. Stored in this way, the mapping is not as direct as it might
have been had the development team numbered all stripes with whole numbers, but it is
still clear that each version of the game software created during the prerelease phase
included an additional stripe of functionality.