Question 2. The philosophy of the Ancient World: Ancient India, Ancient China, Ancient Greece.
The emergence of philosophy in ancient India dates back to the middle of the first millennium BC. The oldest monument of Indian culture is the Vedas - a collection of hymns in honor of gods and heroes, which sets forth a mythological and religious view of the world, man, morality, etc. There are four parts in the Vedas: Samhita (hymns, songs, spells, magic), Brahmans (comments on rituals), Aranyaki (instructions for hermits), Upanishads (philosophical and religious complex). It is in the Upanishads that the beginning of religious and philosophical thinking is indicated. The basis of being recognized is the universal principle - Brahma, associated with the individual soul Atman. An integral part of this teaching is the concept of the wheel of Sansara and the law of the retribution of karma.

Samhites:

-Guest Collection of 1017 hymns (samhita), addressed to the Vedic gods.

- Samaveda The description of the correct pronunciation of the hymns of the Rig Veda (during sacrifices).

-Yajurveda Description of the correct ritual in which the Rigveda hymns are pronounced.

A collection of spells addressed to gods, demons, spirits, etc ..


The philosophical schools of ancient India can be divided into orthodox, recognizing the authority of the Vedas, and unorthodox. The first include the school: Mimansa, Vedanta, Sank-Hya, Yoga, Nyaya, Vaisheshika, the second - Jainism, Buddhism, Lokayata.
Atman is a particle of God-Brahma in the human soul. Atman is primordial, unchanging, eternal.
Manas - the soul of man, arising in the process of life. Manas is constantly evolving, reaches high levels or deteriorates depending on the actions of a person, his personal experience, the course of fate.
Sansara is the doctrine of eternity and the indestructibility of the soul, which goes through a chain of sufferings in mortal life.
Karma - the predestination of human life, fate. The goal of karma is to lead a person through tests so that his soul can be improved and achieve the highest moral development - moksha.
Moksha is the highest moral perfection, after reaching which the evolution of the soul (karma) stops. Souls that have attained Moksha are freed from the chain of infinite life and become Mahatmas - Great Souls.


Buddhism. The founder of this doctrine is Gautam Buddha (Sid¬hardha Shakyamuni), who was born in a princely family in Northern India. Buddha passed a difficult life path (heir to the throne, ascetic-recluse, sage), after which he "saw the light" and passed on his spiritual achievements to people.