Patristics is the period of search and formulation of the basic world-outlook, including the philosophical positions of the Middle Ages. The fathers of the church had the historical mission of theoretical understanding and the development of not only many new purely theological questions and problems of the Christian religion. They developed a new worldview, organically combining many elements in it from various sources, including from ancient philosophies. An extremely great role in this respect belongs to Augustine, who carried out a grandiose synthesis of new worldview concepts of Christianity and many achievements of ancient thought. From his hands, European culture received an already complete, integral medieval outlook, the theoretical foundation of which was primarily Plato's philosophy (mostly, however, in its Neo-Platonic version). And until Thomas Aquinas (XIII century) Augustine was the main philosophical authority of the Middle Ages.
Augustine also belongs to the first in European culture linear interpretation of the historical process, developed by him in his main philosophical work “On the City of God”. This interpretation is characterized by providentialism and eschatology, according to which the course of the historical process is determined by God's providence, providence and will inevitably end at the moment of Christ’s second coming to Earth and the subsequent terrible judgment. The beginning of this process was the creation of Adam and Eve by God, and his central event was the incarnation of God - the life, death and resurrection of Christ. The content of human history is the struggle in it "two grads" - earthly and heavenly. They are “created by two kinds of love: earthly - by the love of self, brought to the contempt of God, and heavenly - by the love of God, brought to the contempt of itself”. The law of the life of the first is hatred, anger, selfishness, injustice, violence, etc., the same heavenly city as uniting the faithful to God the church of Christ lives according to the law of love, solidarity and mutual aid, humility and voluntary obedience, is the only and reliable anchor, beacon and hope of salvation of all people, and therefore the justification of existence and sinful, condemned to perdition, the city of earth.