In general, in the process of the development of medieval philosophy, the preponderance in the ratio of faith and reason gradually moved towards the mind. Thomas Aquinas was the last exponent of the concept of harmony of faith and reason. He believed that although the basic dogmas and mysteries of Christianity were superior to reason, They still could not contradict him. Already simultaneously with Thomas, the theory of “dual truth” begins to gain momentum, according to which truths of faith and reason can contradict each other: the true from the point of view of reason can be false from the point of view of faith and vice versa. The author of this theory is the Arab thinker Ibn-Rushd (Averroes) (1129-1198). The spread of this concept actually led to the separation of two areas of knowledge, common in the framework of medieval culture: philosophy and theology.
The main position of dogma that the scholastics sought to substantiate was the very being of God. There were a posteriori and a priori evidence of the existence of God. A posteriori based on experience, the contemplation of certain fundamental qualities of the world, which testify to the existence of God. Thomas Aquinas proposed five such evidence:
1. cosmological evidence. In the world, everything has its cause, therefore, there is also a root cause - God.
2. Everything in the world is moving, from which it can be concluded that there is a prime mover - God.
3. All finite things are random (they could not have been), therefore, there must be something necessary that leads them to being - God.
4. The relativity of the perfection of everything that exists gives reason to conclude about the existence of an absolutely perfect being - God.
5. Teleological evidence. Everything in the world is expediently arranged, therefore, the rational organizer himself must exist - God.
A priori proof is based only on the data of inner experience and proceeds from the fact that in our mind there is an idea of ??an all-perfect being (God), but the property of existence is also perfection, therefore a being with all the perfections cannot but exist, therefore God exists. The Catholic Church accepted only five a posteriori evidence.
Another problem of great importance, which was the subject of controversy within the framework of scholasticism, is the problem of universals (lat. Universalia is a general concept). The essence of this problem is whether the general concepts should be considered as real or not. The other side of the question can be formulated as follows: what is primary: general concepts or single things? The beginnings of this controversy can be found already in antiquity: in the dispute between the sophists and Socrates, and also in the criticism of Plato by Aristotle.
In connection with this problem, two opposing concepts have emerged: realism and nominalism. Representatives of realism believed universals really existent, and the existence of universals, in their opinion, precedes the existence of certain things. Nominalism, on the contrary, proceeded from the fact that only individual things really exist.