The first source of development of society is in the world of nature, which is the basis of its existence, more precisely, “the interaction of society and nature. Attention is drawn to the fact that the largest civilizations arose in the channels of the great rivers, and the most successful development of the capitalist formation took place in countries with a temperate climate. The current stage of interaction between nature and society is characterized by the concept of an environmental crisis, the main cause of which was the installation to "conquer nature", ignoring the limits of its sustainability in relation to anthropogenic influences. It is necessary to change the consciousness and behavior of billions of people, so that this source of self-development of society could act further.
The second source of development of society is associated with technological determinants, with the role of technology and the process of the division of labor in the social structure. T. Adorno believed that the question of the priority of the economy or technology resembles the question of what was before: the chicken or the egg. The same applies to the nature and type of labor of a person, which largely determines the system of social relations. This became especially evident in the modern era, when the contours of a post-industrial, information technology society became apparent. In this case, the main contradiction arises between the humane goals of human existence and the "soulless" world of information technology, which carries a potential threat to humanity.
The third source of self-development of society is seen in the spiritual sphere, in the process of the realization of one or another religious or secular ideal. The idea of ??theocracy, that is, the management of society and the state by the highest religious authorities, was very popular in history, and even now it finds a place in the concepts of religious fundamentalism. The history of society in this case is viewed as the realization of the will of God, and the task of man is to embody this craft, focusing not on earthly problems, but on preparing for future, eternal life. In the concepts of the history of A. Toynbee, II Sorokin, the main importance in determining the development of society is given to its moral-religious and spiritual improvement, the ratio of sanctions and awards as the leading cause of group solidarity of people. Supporters of the communist ideal see it as one of the main “engines” of social development, calling for millions of people to fight for the liberation of mankind and build a just society.