Social action, like any other behavior, can be (according to Weber):
1. it is purposeful if it is based on the expectation of a certain behavior of objects of the external world and other people and the use of this expectation as “conditions” or “means” to achieve its rationally set and thought out goal,
2. value-rational, based on belief in unconditional - aesthetic, religious or any other - self-sufficient value of a certain behavior as such, regardless of what it leads to;
3. affective, primarily emotional, that is, due to the affects or emotional state of the individual;
4. traditional, that is based on a long habit.
Wherein:
1. A purely traditional action, like a purely reactive imitation, is at the very border, and often even beyond what can be called “meaningfully” oriented action. Indeed, it is often only an automatic reaction to habitual irritation in the direction of the once learned installation. Most of the usual everyday behavior of people is close to this type, which occupies a certain place in the systematization of behavior, not only as a borderline case, but also because loyalty to the habit can be realized here in various ways and to varying degrees (see below). In some cases, this type is close to type No. 2.
2. A purely affective action is also on the border and often beyond the limit of what is “meaningful”, consciously oriented; it may be an obstruction-free response to a completely unusual irritation. If the action due to affect finds its expression in the conscious emotional discharge, we are talking about sublimation. In this case, this type is almost always close to “value rationalization”, or to purposeful behavior, or both.

3. The value-rational orientation of the action differs from affective behavior by the conscious determination of its focus and a consistently planned orientation to it. Their common feature is that the meaning for them is not to achieve any external goal, but to the very specific behavior as such. The individual acts under the influence of passion if he seeks to immediately satisfy his need for revenge, pleasure, devotion, blissful contemplation, or relieve the tension of any other affects, however low or subtle. Pure value-rationally acts the one who, regardless of the possible consequences, follows his convictions about duty, dignity, beauty, religious designs, piety or the importance of the "subject" of any kind. Value-rational action (in our terminology) is always subject to the “commandments” or “requirements”, in obedience to which this individual sees his duty. Only to the extent that human action is focused on them - which is quite rare and in a very different, for the most part a very insignificant degree - can we speak of value-rational action. As will become clear from the further presentation, the significance of the latter is so serious that it makes it possible to distinguish it into a special type of action, although it does not attempt to give an exhaustive classification of the types of human action in any sense.
4. Purposefully, the individual whose behavior is focused on the goal, means and side effects of his actions, who rationally considers the relationship of funds to the goal and side effects and, finally, the relation of various possible goals to each other, that is, acts, in any case, not affective (primarily not emotionally) and not traditional. The choice between competing and colliding goals and consequences can, in turn, be oriented rationally - then the behavior is only selective in its means. An individual can also include competing and conflicting goals — without a value-rational orientation toward “commandments” and “requirements” —simply as given subjective needs on a scale according to their consciously weighted need, and then orienting their behavior so that these needs Satisfied in the prescribed manner (the principle of "marginal utility"). The value-rational orientation of the action may, therefore, be in a different relationship with the goal-rational orientation. From the goal-rational point of view, value rationality is always irrational, and the more rational it is, the more it absolutizes the value it is guided by, because it less takes into account the consequences of actions, the more unconditional the value of behavior itself (purity of conviction, beauty, absolute good, absolute fulfillment of one’s duty). However, the absolute goal-rationality of the action is also essentially only a borderline case.